# Motor Vehicle Collisions Study
Motor vehicle crash is one of the leading causes of death globally and around 1.36 people lose their life on roadways each year in the world<sup>1</sup>. In my project, I investigated if motor vehicle collision events have any seasonal or temporal pattern and what are the possible factors that might influence the accident rate and casualty rate. Revealing the pattern and underlying factors will be an important first step to help establish effective preventive measure. It will also provide insights for auto insurance company on business problems such as the necessity of dynamic insurance payment plan. 

I acquired the dataset from NYC Open Data. This dataset contains details of crash events reported by NYPD from 2015 up till now (last updated Feb 5, 2021). Details of the data included in the dataset can be found https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Public-Safety/Motor-Vehicle-Collisions-Crashes/h9gi-nx95.

First, I proposed to examine if there is any seasonal pattern of motor vehicle collisions. As there is no data of the amount of traffic in different times of the year in this dataset, instead of comparing number of crash events in different seasons, I looked at if casualty ratios (proportion of the crashes that caused injury or death) are of any difference. Overall, casualty ratios are similar between four seasons, with summer and autumn slightly higher. I further broke down the casualty into different categories depending on the parties (pedestrian, cyclist and motorist). Motorist casualty is the most common one and its seasonal pattern is very similar to the overall pattern. However, pedestrian casualty and cyclist causality have very distinct seasonal patterns, with significant higher cyclist casualty in summer and autumn while pedestrian casualty is higher in autumn and winter. This preliminary analysis suggests some correlation between outdoor activities in different seasons with motor vehicle collision casualty. Therefore, apart from ensuring proper driver safety education, there is also a need to raise public awareness of road safety when conducting outdoor activities such as cycling and jogging in particular seasons. 

I also proposed to investigate the pattern of motor vehicle collisions in different hours of a day. The peaks of collision events happened at 8am, 2pm and 4-5pm and there is no seasonal difference of the trend. This distribution pattern indicates weather or temperature or daylight differences in different seasons are not the contributing factors to motor vehicle collisions and the peaks is probably due to high traffic volume at those hours. For further analysis, data about traffic volume of different times of the day should be obtained and incorporated. Next, I studied the casualty ratio in different hours in a day. Surprisingly, casualty ratios have peaks at 4am and 11pm, which are the times with least motor vehicle collisions. The opposite pattern of number of crashes and severity of crashes (determined if there is casualty or not) is very interesting. It suggests lighting conditions, tiredness of drivers might be correlated with high severity of crashes at these hours. If lighting conditions is related to severity of crashes, it is expected the casualty ratio patterns different among different seasons due to daylight time differences. To test this hypothesis, I generated line graphs to visualize the casualty ration in different hours between four seasons. The casualty ratio peak for autumn and spring are both at 4am, which is consistent with the fact that these two seasons have similar daylight time. The peak for summer is 3am and winter is 4am to 5am. My preliminary conclusion of this analysis is that lighting conditions may be an underlying factor for casualty in motor vehicle conditions. For further analysis of this correlation, I would suggest to get sunrise and sunset time of every date in this dataset.



**References**
1. World Health Organization (WHO). Global Status Report on Road Safety 2018. December 2018. https://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/road_safety_status/2018/en/external 
